@c This is part of the Emacs Mac port manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2000-2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Copyright (C) 2012-2014  YAMAMOTO Mitsuharu
@c See file emacs.texi for copying conditions.
@node Mac Port
@appendix Emacs and Mac OS X with the Mac port
@cindex Mac port

  This section briefly describes the peculiarities of using Emacs
under Mac OS X with the Mac port.  This port provides a native GUI
support for Mac OS X 10.4 -- 10.10.  Note that Emacs 23 and later
already contain the official GUI support via the NS (Cocoa) port for
Mac OS X 10.4 and later (@pxref{Mac OS / GNUstep}).  So if it is good
enough for you, then you don't need to try this.

  The Mac port is a descendant of the following ports for Mac OS X:

@itemize
@item
Carbon port for Emacs 22 (aka ``Carbon Emacs'', don't confuse it with
``Carbon Emacs Package''): this is a part of the official GNU Emacs 22
distribution and provides native GUI support for Mac OS.  It has been
used in almost all the Emacs 22 distributions/packages for Mac OS X
with its native GUI.

  The Carbon port was initiated by Andrew Choi, using his Mac OS 8/9
port as a basis.  He had been the maintainer of Mac OS port of GNU
Emacs and participated in the development until late 2003.

@item
Carbon+AppKit port for Emacs 22.3: this is a port of the Carbon port
above.  The two ports differ in the GUI implementation basis: the
Carbon port uses Carbon HIToolbox, but the Carbon+AppKit port uses the
Cocoa Application Kit framework (AppKit).  The Carbon+AppKit port
inherits the code of the non-GUI part of the Carbon port, such as
drawing, font and image handling.  So in this sense, the Carbon+AppKit
port can be regarded as a variant of the Carbon port.  Obviously, this
is not a backport of the Cocoa/GNUstep port (aka ``Emacs.app'' or the
NS port).
@end itemize

  The Mac port doesn't support multi-tty with GUI.  The developer has
no idea how to detach Emacs as a GUI application from Window Server or
Dock without separating a GUI process (not thread) from the main Emacs
(Lisp evaluator) process.  TTY-only multi-tty is supposed to work.

@menu
* Mac Invocation::        Invocation of Emacs Mac port.
* Mac Input::             Keyboard and mouse input on the Mac port.
* Mac Fonts::             Specifying fonts on the Mac port.
* Mac Images and Colors:: Images and colors on the Mac port.
* Mac Fullscreen::        Fullscreen support on the Mac port.
* Mac Functions::         Lisp functions specific to the Mac port.
@end menu

@node Mac Invocation
@section Invocation of Emacs Mac Port
@cindex Emacs invocation (Mac port)

  Emacs Mac port takes the values of environment variables just as you
would expect.  When it is run from the Finder as a GUI application,
then it inherits those defined in user's login shell, so settings in
@file{/etc/profile}, @file{~/.bash_profile}, etc. are in effect if you
use bash as your login shell.  When it is run from a terminal, it
inherits the values of environment variables from the shell from which
it is invoked.  This also applies to an invocation via the
@command{open} command.

  On Mac OS X 10.7 and earlier, if there exists the file
@file{~/.MacOSX/environment.plist}, which affects all the applications
invoked from the Finder, then its settings take precedence over those
from your login shell for consistency with other applications.  This
does not apply to OS X 10.8 and later.

  Command line arguments are specified like

@example
/Applications/Emacs.app/Contents/MacOS/Emacs -g 80x25 &
@end example

@noindent
if the Mac port is installed at @file{/Applications/Emacs.app}.  In
addition to the standard command line options (@pxref{Emacs
Invocation}), you can also specify temporary Preference settings,
which are only applied to a specific invocation, as command line
options just as in other Cocoa applications (e.g.,
@samp{-AppleAntiAliasingThreshold 14}).  An alternative way to specify
command line options on Mac OS X 10.6 and later is to use the
@samp{--args} option in the @command{open} command.

  Holding shift key on startup is recognized as the @samp{-Q} option,
which means to start Emacs with minimum customizations.

@cindex Preferences (Mac port)
  Although the Mac port does not support X resources (@pxref{X
Resources}) directly, one can use the Preferences system in place of X
resources.  For example, adding the line

@example
Emacs.cursorType: bar
@end example

@noindent
to @file{~/.Xresources} in X11 corresponds to the execution of

@example
defaults write org.gnu.Emacs Emacs.cursorType bar
@end example

@noindent
on Mac OS X.  One can use boolean or numeric values as well as string
values as follows:

@example
defaults write org.gnu.Emacs Emacs.toolBar -bool false
defaults write org.gnu.Emacs Emacs.lineSpacing -int 3
@end example

@noindent
Try @kbd{M-x man RET defaults RET} for the usage of the
@command{defaults} command.  Alternatively, if you have Developer
Tools installed on Mac OS X, you can use Property List Editor to edit
the file @file{~/Library/Preferences/org.gnu.Emacs.plist}.

@cindex language environments (Mac port)
  The default language environment (@pxref{Language Environments}) is
set according to the locale setting at the startup time.  On Mac OS X,
the locale setting is consulted in the following order:

@enumerate
@item
Environment variables @env{LC_ALL}, @env{LC_CTYPE} and @env{LANG} as
in other systems.

@item
Preference @code{AppleLocale} that is set by default on Mac OS X 10.3
and later.

@item
Preference @code{AppleLanguages} that is set by default on Mac OS X
10.1 and later.
@end enumerate

  The default values of almost all variables about coding systems are
also set according to the language environment.  So usually you don't
have to customize these variables manually.

@node Mac Input
@section Keyboard and Mouse Input on the Mac Port
@cindex Meta (Mac port)

@vindex mac-control-modifier
@vindex mac-command-modifier
@vindex mac-option-modifier
@vindex mac-function-modifier
@vindex mac-right-control-modifier
@vindex mac-right-command-modifier
@vindex mac-right-option-modifier
  On the Mac port, Emacs can use the @key{control}, @key{command},
@key{option}, and @key{function} (labeled @samp{fn}) keys as any of
Emacs modifier keys except @key{SHIFT} (i.e., @key{ALT}, @key{CTRL},
@key{HYPER}, @key{META}, and @key{SUPER}).  The assignment is
controlled by the variables @code{mac-control-modifier},
@code{mac-command-modifier}, @code{mac-option-modifier}, and
@code{mac-function-modifier}.  One may assign different modifiers to
the @key{control}, @key{command}, and @key{option} keys placed on the
right part of the keyboard using the variables
@code{mac-right-control-modifier}, @code{mac-right-command-modifier},
and @code{mac-right-option-modifier}, respectively.@footnote{The left
and right versions cannot be distinguished on some environments such
as Screen Sharing.  Also, certain combinations of a key with both
versions of the same modifier do not emit events at the system level.}

  The value for each of these variables can be one of the following
symbols: @code{alt}, @code{control}, @code{hyper}, @code{meta},
@code{super}, and @code{nil} (no particular assignment).  By default,
the @key{control} key works as @key{CTRL}, and the @key{command} key
as @key{META}.  For the right versions of the variables, the symbol
@code{left}, which is the default, means the same assignment as the
left counterpart.  The property list format @code{(:ordinary
@var{symbol} :function @var{symbol} :mouse @var{symbol})} allows us to
specify different assignments depending on the input types: ordinary
keys, function keys, and mouse operations.

  For the left and right @key{option} keys, if the value of the
corresponding variable (or the value of the @code{:ordinary} property
if the value of the variable is a property list) is set to @code{nil},
then the key works as the normal @key{option} key.  This enables
dead-key processing and is useful for entering non-@acronym{ASCII}
Latin characters directly from the Mac keyboard, for example.  By
default, the @key{option} key works as the normal @key{option} key for
the ordinary keys, and as @key{ALT} for the function keys and the
mouse operations.

  The Mac port recognizes the setting in the International system
preference pane and supports international and alternative keyboard
layouts (e.g., Dvorak).  Selecting one of the layouts from the
keyboard layout pull-down menu will affect how the keys typed on the
keyboard are interpreted.

@vindex mac-pass-command-to-system
@vindex mac-pass-control-to-system
  Mac OS X intercepts and handles certain key combinations. These will
not be passed to Emacs.  One can disable this interception by setting
@code{mac-pass-command-to-system} or @code{mac-pass-control-to-system}
to @code{nil}.

@vindex mac-emulate-three-button-mouse
  Especially for one-button mice, the multiple button feature can be
emulated by setting @code{mac-emulate-three-button-mouse} to @code{t}
or @code{reverse}.  If set to @code{t} (@code{reverse}, respectively),
pressing the mouse button with the @key{option} key is recognized as
the second (third) button, and that with the @key{command} key is
recognized as the third (second) button.

@vindex mac-wheel-button-is-mouse-2
  For multi-button mice, the wheel button and the secondary button are
recognized as the second and the third button, respectively.  If
@code{mac-wheel-button-is-mouse-2} is set to @code{nil}, their roles
are exchanged.

@vindex mac-mouse-wheel-smooth-scroll
  Pixel-based mouse wheel smooth scrolling is enabled by default for
newer mice/trackpads.  You can turn it off by setting
@code{mac-mouse-wheel-smooth-scroll} to @code{nil}.

  Just as in many Cocoa applications (and some Carbon applications
like Carbon Emacs), you can use @samp{Command-Control-D} for looking
up a word under the mouse pointer in the selected window.  The same
functionality is provided by double/single-tapping a trackpad with
three fingers on Mac OS X 10.7/10.8, respectively.

  In addition to the standard Emacs events, the Mac port also accepts
several gesture events on newer mice/trackpads, and some gestures have
default bindings.  For example, fullscreen can be turned on/off by
pinching out/in on a newer trackpad with the shift key on Mac OS X
10.5.2 and later.

  The Mac port also provides Apple event sending with (a)synchronous
reply handling.  @acronym{ODB} Editor Suite support is added as an
example.

@node Mac Fonts
@section Specifying Fonts on the Mac Port
@cindex fonts (Mac port)

  The way of specifying fonts on the Mac port is basically the same as
in other platforms.  @xref{Fonts}.  Clicking on @samp{Set Default
Font} in the @samp{Options} menu brings us the modal font selection
dialog.  You can also use the non-modal font panel via @samp{Font
Panel} in the @samp{Show/Hide} submenu in the @samp{Options} menu.

  The Mac port recognizes three formats as a string representation of
a font name: Fontconfig pattern, GTK font description, and X Logical
Font Description (XLFD).  In a Fontconfig pattern, you can use the
following properties as well as the standard ones like @samp{slant},
@samp{weight}, etc.

@table @samp
@item antialias
One of @samp{true}, @samp{false}, @samp{on} or @samp{off}, meaning
whether the font is antialiased or not.  Not specifying this property
means to use the value of the @samp{AppleAntiAliasingThreshold}
Preference as the threshold.

@item minspace
One of @samp{true}, @samp{false}, @samp{on} or @samp{off}, meaning
whether the font ignores the leading value in font metrics.

@item destination
The value 1 means the destination is video text as in the XLFD
Conventions, and screen font metrics are used in that case.  For
example, you can see the difference between the following examples:

@smallexample
(make-frame '((font . "Monaco-9:antialias=off")))
(make-frame '((font . "Monaco-9:antialias=off:destination=1")))
@end smallexample
@end table

  As Quickdraw-style font rendering is considered obsolete as of Mac
OS X 10.5, the variable @code{mac-allow-anti-aliasing}, which was
supported in the preceding ports (under a somewhat inappropriate
name), is no longer supported in the Mac port.  If you want to control
anti-aliasing, then you can set it with either from the Appearance
pane of the System Preferences@footnote{Change of text smoothing
threshold setting in the Appearance pane of the System Preferences is
reflected immediately.}, or the @code{AppleAntiAliasingThreshold}
Preference that can be set with the @command{defaults} command.

@example
defaults write org.gnu.Emacs AppleAntiAliasingThreshold @var{n}
@end example

  The bold and italic variants of a font are synthesized if it lacks
genuine ones (e.g., Monaco).  Unfortunately, synthetic ones look so
ugly (faint or smudgy) without anti-aliasing.  So the Mac port
automatically turns on anti-aliasing for synthetic bold or italic,
regardless of the anti-aliasing settings mentioned above.

  Also, synthetic bold looks thinner if the background is darker than
the foreground and the @acronym{LCD} font smoothing is turned on.  In
such cases, you can turn off synthetic bold for particular fonts and
use overstriking instead by customizing the variable
@code{face-ignored-fonts}:

@example
(add-to-list 'face-ignored-fonts "\\`-[^-]*-monaco-bold-")
@end example

@vindex mac-text-scale-standard-width
  If you are using newer trackpads with Mac OS X 10.5.2 and later,
then you can scale text size by pinch out/in.  On Mac OS X 10.7 and
later, double-tapping either a touch-sensitive mouse with one finger
or a trackpad with two fingers changes the buffer text scaling to
unscaled if previously scaled.  And if previously unscaled and the
pointer is either before the indentation or after the end of line,
then the buffer text is scaled so the default font occupies at least
@code{mac-text-scale-standard-width} columns in the tapped window.  If
previously unscaled and the pointer is between the indentation and the
end of line, then the buffer text is scaled to approximately 150%.

  The Mac port provides a couple of font backends, @code{mac-ct} using
the Core Text framework introduced in Mac OS X 10.5, and @code{mac-fd}
using NSFontDescriptor expanded in Mac OS X 10.4.  An appropriate font
backend is selected automatically depending on the @acronym{OS}
version at startup, and one backend is used at a time.

  All these backends support Unicode character display including
non-@acronym{BMP} ones, Complex Text Layout such as Devanagari, and
glyph selection with variation selectors.  Most of Adobe-Japan1
ideographic glyphs are accessible via @acronym{IVSes} (Ideographic
Variation Sequences) even for the OS-bundled Hiragino fonts, which do
not contain the @acronym{UVS} subtable in their cmap table as of Mac
OS X 10.6.  If compiled and executed on Mac OS X 10.7 and later, then
the Mac port can also display color bitmap fonts such as Apple Color
Emoji.  This also supports display of some combinations of regional
indicator symbols, such as U+1F1EF followed by U+1F1F5, as national
flags.  Variation Selectors 15 (text-style) and 16 (emoji-style) are
also supported.

  They also use non-integral x positions for displaying antialiased
proportional fonts.  You can see the difference by putting the box
cursor over Helvetica 12pt @samp{I}, whose ideal width is 3.33398 but
displayed with the rounded width 3, for example.

@node Mac Images and Colors
@section Images and Colors on the Mac Port
@cindex Images and Colors (Mac port)

@cindex image formats (Mac port)
  The Mac port supports almost all the image formats that GNU Emacs
supports (@pxref{Image Formats,,, elisp, The Emacs Lisp Reference
Manual}), except PostScript.  None of them but ImageMagick requires
external libraries.  SVG is supported via the WebKit framework, which
is bundled to the system, but the Mac port can also be built with
@code{librsvg} as an alternative SVG renderer.  If you have
@code{librsvg} installed but want to use the WebKit framework for
rendering SVG, then give the @code{--without-rsvg} option to the
@code{configure} command.

  In addition to the standard image types, the Mac port provides an
image type symbol @code{image-io}, which is parallel to the image type
symbol @code{imagemagick} but uses the Image I/O framework.  It also
works as a fallback of @code{imagemagick} if the Mac port is not
compiled with the ImageMagick support, so you can scale and rotate
images even without ImageMagick.

  The @code{image-io} image type also provides rasterization of
several document formats such as PDF, RTF, HTML, WEBARCHIVE, DOC, etc.
The list of supported formats can be obtained by evaluating
@code{(image-io-types)}.  Because the @code{image-io} image type
accepts the same image descriptor properties as the @code{imagemagick}
image type does (@pxref{ImageMagick Images,,, elisp, The Emacs Lisp
Reference Manual}), you can specify the page number (0 for the first
page) of the document by the @code{:index} property and get the number
of pages by the @code{image-metadata} function.

  Since Image mode supports multi-frame image navigation (@pxref{File
Conveniences}) primarily for animated images, you can browse
multi-page documents in several formats that @code{image-io} supports
with the setting like this:

@example
(when (and (image-type-available-p 'image-io)
           (not (boundp 'imagemagick-render-type)))
   ;; Image I/O is used as a fallback of ImageMagick.
   (setq imagemagick-enabled-types t)
   (setq imagemagick-types-inhibit
         (cons 'XML (delq 'PDF imagemagick-types-inhibit)))
   (imagemagick-register-types))
@end example

@noindent
Note: if you have ImageMagick installed, you need to build the Mac
port executable without the genuine ImageMagick support (i.e.,
@code{--without-imagemagick}) so @code{image-io} can be used as a
fallback of @code{imagemagick}.


@cindex high-resolution image support (Mac port)
  When loading an image from a file, the Mac port respects the
@code{@@2x} naming convention for high-resolution and automatically
selects an image file according to the backing scale factor.  For
example, if a file named @file{foo.png} is to be loaded on a
high-resolution environment, and there is another file named
@file{foo@@2x.png} in the same directory, then the latter is used
automatically.  DocView mode (@pxref{Document View}) is modified so it
can automatically take advantage of this feature.

  An alternative way to support high-resolution is to use the TIFF
image format.  A single TIFF file or data can contain multiple images
for multiple resolutions, typically the one with standard width and
height, and the one with width and height doubled.  If an image
descriptor (@pxref{Image Descriptors,,, elisp, The Emacs Lisp
Reference Manual}) for a TIFF file or data does not contain an
explicit @code{:index} property specifying the image number, then an
appropriate image is automatically selected from the images in the
file or data.  If tool bar icons are provided by TIFF files, they are
preferred on the Mac port.

  As SVG images are inherently resolution-independent, the images are
automatically rendered with appropriate scaling for high-resolution
environment.  Rasterization of documents by the @code{image-io} image
type mentioned above also takes account of resolution.  Note that
resolution can change dynamically on Mac OS X 10.7 and later even for
the same frame, when it is moved from one monitor to another for
example.  The Mac port detects such a resolution change and re-render
images or reload files automatically.

@cindex color specifications (Mac port)
  When specifying colors, RGB triplets (@pxref{Colors}) are
interpreted as those in the sRGB color space.  This may give a
different look from other ports of GNU Emacs.

@node Mac Fullscreen
@section Fullscreen support on the Mac Port
@cindex fullscreen support (Mac port)

  Although @samp{fullscreen} and @samp{fullboth} are synonymous as a
value of the @code{fullscreen} frame parameter in the original Emacs,
they are distinguished in the Mac port running on Mac OS X 10.7 and
later.  The former means a system-wide full screen mode with a
dedicated desktop (or Space), while the latter means making the frame
fullscreen in a desktop (or Space) shared with the other applications.
Note that the command @code{toggle-frame-fullscreen} uses the former,
and the command line option @samp{-fs} or @samp{--fullscreen} uses the
latter.  As Mac OS X 10.6 and earlier do not have the system-wide full
screen mode, both values are necessarily synonymous.

  Besides setting the @code{fullscreen} frame parameter directly,
pressing the button on the title bar turns on the system-wide full
screen mode on Mac OS X 10.7 and later.  The other @samp{fullboth}
full screen can be turned on by pinching out on a newer trackpad with
the shift key on Mac OS X 10.5.2 and later.

  Unlike the original Emacs, enabling or disabling Menu Bar mode
(@pxref{Menu Bars}) does not affect the appearance of the menu bar on
the Mac port because it does not make sense on OS X having the global
menu bar.  Instead, the value of the @code{menu-bar-lines} frame
parameter affects the system-wide full screen behavior of the frame.
In most cases, disabling the menu bar of a particular frame by default
means that it is a utility frame used for a subsidiary purpose
together with other frames, rather than an ordinary frame on its own.
Examples include the speedbar (@pxref{Speedbar}) and Ediff Control
Panel (@pxref{Top, Ediff, Ediff, ediff, The Ediff Manual}).  Using
this heuristics, the Mac port regards a frame having a menu bar as an
ordinary frame that is eligible for full screen.  Conversely, a frame
without a menu bar is considered as a utility frame and it can coexist
with a full screen ordinary frame and other utility frames in a same
desktop (or Space) for full screen.  Note that a utility frame doesn't
have the full screen button on the title bar.  If you don't see the
full screen button while it is supposed to be there, then check the
menu bar setting.

@node Mac Functions
@section Lisp Functions Specific to the Mac Port
@cindex Lisp functions (Mac port)

@findex do-applescript
  The function @code{do-applescript} takes a string argument,
executes it as an AppleScript command, and returns the result as a
string.

@findex mac-file-alias-p
  The function @code{mac-file-alias-p} can be used to check if the
specified file name is a name of an alias file, and if so, which file
it is referring to.

@findex mac-get-preference
@findex mac-convert-property-list
  The function @code{mac-get-preference} returns the Preferences value
converted to a Lisp object for a specified key and application.  The
function @code{mac-convert-property-list} converts a Core Foundation
property list, which is typically used in a @samp{.plist} file,
between several formats (@acronym{XML}, binary, or Lisp
representation).

@findex mac-start-animation
  The function @code{mac-start-animation} starts animation effect
using Core Animation on Mac OS X 10.5 and later.
